---
title: Scholarly Editions as Networks of Texts
author: Andrew Dunning
date: 2015-06-26
locale: en-GB
abstract: |
    Our ability to read premodern texts can be most effectively advanced by enabling scholars to easily create documentary editions and show their relationship to other texts. The Text Encoding Initiative (TEI) transcription guidelines represent the most developed and stable translation of recent editing theory into a set of encoding guidelines, and should be taken into account in any such project. The practicality of this model is examined in the light of the author's experience in editing medieval Latin works.
notes: |
    This paper was presented at the Digital Latin Library Seminar, 26 June 2015.
bibliography: 'editions-bibliography.yaml'
...

Last Easter, my grandfather (a retired Jersey farmer) asked me a surprisingly pointed question. 'Aren't you playing God with our books?'

This neatly sums up the typical attitude towards the scholarly editing community. In its most extreme form, 'King-James-only' advocates promote an English translation of the Bible as it was revised in the seventeenth century (in the particular form into which it fossilized in the nineteenth century), claiming that modern editors and translators are misrepresenting the past. It is easy to dismiss such positions as uninformed, but without access to manuscripts or an easy method to compare sources, most of the world has to take it on faith that editors are representing their source materials accurately.

Today, the availability of digitized manuscripts is both confirming that editors are overwhelmingly honest and scrupulous people, and revealing the vast number of details that they have overlooked, sometimes significantly changing our approach to a text. But our editions have not kept pace with intellectual development, remaining locked in to a publication method that has not changed substantially since the eighteenth century. This has presented a host of problems, as in the following situations (slightly modified to prevent identification of the individuals involved):

- An aspiring student cannot find reading material during summer break, because there are no Latin books available in the local public library, and ends up reading nothing, having been forewarned by a professor not to trust online texts because they lack any kind of critical apparatus.
- A student edits a Latin text for a doctoral thesis, but lacks the library resources needed to publish it, having taken work outside academia.
- A group of students cannot make sense of a text they are studying, using the online Patrologia Latina that seemed most convenient. They blame themselves, and end up discouraged, only to realize later that the text itself has distorted the manuscripts, and even the early-modern edition from which Migne worked. Though the work was re-edited in the late 1990s, this version is not available to them, as the only library that owns the volume within several hundred kilometres has mis-shelved it, and a replacement would cost €400.
- A brilliant palaeographer but unaccomplished Latinist is told that an edition submitted to a press will have to be completely redone before publication. Nobody wants to assist with an edition for which they would only receive partial credit, and the typescript disappears after the scholar's death. A student wishing to read the book a decade later must start from scratch.
- A scholar examining a text makes a brilliant emendation to an ancient work. Sadly, almost nobody is aware of it, because it is only publicly mentioned in an obscure journal.
- A translator, faced with hundreds of witnesses for a text, decides to start from an incunable; but is told that, as this represents a corrupt version of the work, this is not acceptable for publication. The text instead continues to languish in obscurity.
- A team of editors work for years on an enormous medieval book. Though their version of the text is better than anything else in the world, they run out of funding before completion and it is never published, having been unwilling to publish their earlier version because there would be no means to fix the errors that the field's specialists would notice. The version of the text commonly consulted instead is a partial and deeply flawed transcription published three decades earlier in a journal that is now open-access.

None of these situations had to happen. Even before the Internet, it was evident that, by setting higher scholarly standards for ourselves, we paradoxically allow older, inaccurate editions to dominate historical work, and some have advocated imperfect, low-cost volumes as a solution to improving the accessibility of premodern books [e.g. @ziolkowski:2011laude]. The Internet offers, for the first time, methods of publication that do not involve intellectual sacrifices; yet there is no agreement on how we should carry out future work, or how we are to allow digital editions to meet critical standards. The ideal model for ensuring that premodern works are preserved, made accessible, and made open to wider research is to reimagine the critical edition as a network of manuscripts made analysable through documentary editions, on par with the eclectic texts created by modern editors.

# Why documentary editions?

It is impossible to understand the past without access to primary sources. The highest priority of every academic should be to ensure that our libraries have the resources to conserve manuscripts whose loss would be irreversible  and make their contents more widely available through online facsimiles. Recent events have reminded us that even artefacts in libraries and museums are not immune to disappearance and damage, and the future will have nothing but condemnation for us if inscriptions and manuscripts are lost that could once have been easily photographed. Palaeographical training is unfortunately not an element of a public-school education, nor are most premodern scripts likely to be machine-readable for many years to come; to make premodern sources accessible on a basic level, we need to edit and translate them. 

In spite of the increasing online availability of manuscripts, digital texts still usually lack any documented relationship to their witnesses, typically bereft of the apparatus found in printed texts. This has meant that they are simply not trusted by scholars, though the mere fact that they are online means in practice that they see far more use than their printed counterparts. It has been widely assumed that placing scholarly editions on an equal footing in both print and online formats is best achieved by integrating the critical apparatus [recently articulated by @crane:2015getting]. This has been impractical both because, while OCR software can read linear texts with increasing ease and reliability, encoding an apparatus in a machine-readable form is truly burdensome with available tools; and it carries full copyright protection, unlike edited texts in most parts of the world [@margoni:2011scientific]. Providing funding or even a method to make an apparatus available in a digital format will not solve the problems preventing the wide publication of primary sources for the last two centuries.

Editors have long used documentary methods (understood here as encompassing diplomatic editing) for legal and vernacular documents; the possibilities of online publication, reducing the traditionally high cost of a diplomatic edition, have prompted a great deal more interest in the subject [summarized by @pierazzo:2014digital], though it is also clear that editions of individual manuscripts cannot stand in isolation [as shown by @fischer:2012all]. Editors have been using computers to collate texts for over half a century [@silva:1969identification], but the publication of their supporting files has been rare. Combining the critical and documentary approaches unites the best aspects of the traditional 'recensionist' and 'optimist' schools in editing, personified by Karl Lachmann and Joseph Bédier. Both positions ideally seek to take into account the historical manuscript tradition in its fullness. In reality, this has not been the case, accounting in part for the misgivings surrounding textual critics:

> Most theorists and editors […] are more concerned with variations between the texts in the witnesses than with variations between the witnesses as such. This sort of approach is inevitable, and this sort of impression predictable, if the witnesses are not allowed to speak with a full, codicological voice but only in muffled, "textual" tones. The object of an edition, however, is not solely to recover a text from the witnesses. Rather it is to uncover a textual tradition by which to see beyond the text encased in that tradition to that text as it was before it was launched on the devious path of variation by the present witnesses. [@boyle:1976optimist, pp. 272–273]

The recensionist ideal is time-consuming, and has never fit within a modern academic funding model that promotes short-term projects. Further, though it aims to take the entirety of the manuscript tradition into account, it does not require the editor to produce a record of it. The *apparatus criticus* is not intended as full documentation of the manuscript tradition, as is often mistakenly thought, but the editor's account for the specific research question at hand, typically to recover the earliest archetype of the text. Within this framework, it is not necessary to report common variants deemed irrelevant to the textual tradition, but it can be difficult to know where editors have misread manuscripts and where they have made a conscious choice to suppress a reading. Other scholars often cannot reuse an earlier apparatus to support their own arguments, since working from the same manuscripts with a different stemma will produce a different apparatus. Unfortunately, while recensionist editors are concerned with reconstructing an archetype, this is often not the aim of the readers of primary sources, who can be just as interested in the later reception of the work.

Consider one of the most complex textual traditions in Latin: the Vulgate. It is probably the most widely cited work written in Latin, and surely the most routinely copied book in the Middle Ages [see @van_liere:2014text on the history of the text]. Scholars expressed dissatisfaction with its text almost from the moment it became available, making concerted efforts to produce a more consistent text, most influentially by Alcuin (ca. 740–804). The schools of the later Middle Ages emended the text based on ingenuity and texts ancillary to the Vulgate tradition, such as Jerome's biblical commentaries [see @linde:2011how], resulting in a text that had less relationship to the historical manuscript tradition. This nonetheless formed the basis of the Sixto-Clementine edition [1589–98: edited in @hetzenauer:1906biblia] that dominated the modern period, its papal approbation discouraging further work on the text among Roman Catholics. 

Documentary editions played a key role in surpassing this status quo. @bentley:1721proposals saw the Vulgate as key to a critical text of the New Testament, as did Lachmann [@timpanaro:2005genesis, pp. 64, 84]. It was not until 1877–78, according to @wordsworth:1883oxford [p. 4], that the Oxford University Press embarked on a full critical edition. The work largely occurred in spare moments, and it was not finished for over three quarters of a century; progress slowed after Wordsworth became bishop of Salisbury and his collaborator, White, the dean of Christ Church, Oxford [@wordsworth:1889nouum; with a reader's edition, @wordsworth:1920nouum]. Yet the project quickly achieved both output and funding through a series called 'Old-Latin Biblical Texts', producing seven volumes between 1883 and 1923, mostly documentary editions of key manuscripts. The Vatican, not to be outdone, embarked on an edition of the Vulgate in 1907, and created a Benedictine abbey dedicated to the task, completing the Old Testament in just under ninety years [@pontifical_abbey_of_st_jerome-in-the-city:1926biblia]; like Oxford, they began a series, 'Collectanea biblica latina', that published seventeen volumes between 1912 and 1988. This edition was originally designed as a basis for improved liturgical texts, but it was no longer deemed necessary after the reforms of the Second Vatican Council, which put an official end to the position promoted by the Council of Trent that the Vulgate was effectively the only authoritative version of the Bible [@letis:2002vulgata]. A few of the monks instead produced a manual edition combining the work of the abbey with the edition from Oxford (with the participation of Hedley Sparks, who finished the final fascicles after the deaths of Wordsworth in 1911 and White in 1934). First published in 1969, it quickly became the standard edition of the Vulgate for scholarly work, and has been updated several times [@weber:2007biblia; the second edition of 1975 was largely improved using a predecessor to TUSTEP, described by @ott:1979text; cf. @fischer:1970use]. While it might appear at first glance that there are three independent editions of the Vulgate, they were all controlled by a surprisingly small group of scholars.

We could hardly repeat this 118-year enterprise today, and if one were creating a digital edition of the Vulgate, it might be tempting to simply digitize these three major editions with their apparatus, and call an end to it, as they provide a reasonable reconstruction of an early text largely associated with Jerome [on their methodology, see @quentin:1922mémoire]. Yet medieval Bibles are notoriously variable, and biblical quotations in medieval authors vary wider still, since authors often quote from patristic sources or memory, and sometimes make purposeful alterations to the text, from which we often try to make inferences. Careful work can often reveal that such changes reflect a text known elsewhere, and not the author's originality. The critical editions only fill a limited need; even after the vast amount of labour necessary to digitizing their apparatus, we would be no further ahead in historical knowledge. Instead, let us work what we have: a digital text of the edition by Weber, and transcriptions of several manuscripts. If we focused on publishing texts in a format that allowed readers to add new transcriptions of online manuscripts in parallel, those interested in the early tradition could add in the Codex Amiatinus, while someone else might transcribe the psalter from a Parisian Bible, and both could see how that source compares to other historical witnesses and modern editions. These are all relatively small steps achievable within the scope of a typical grant, but the accumulation of these editions would quickly allow us to improve on past work.

Rethinking the critical edition as a collection of documentary editions (whether these are editions of manuscripts or earlier printed texts) simply entails, in essence, the publication of work from the initial stages of recension that new editors must presently repeat with every new critical edition. The critical apparatus, freed of the need to save paper that gave it its specific form, could be allowed to stand for what it is, and provide a discursive textual commentary explaining the editor's choices. The idea of accumulating documentary editions is hardly a new idea: in the medieval context, it was proposed in the early 1990s as the only workable solution for editing the immensely complicated letter collections of Peter of Blois [@southern:1995towards]. It is essentially the approach taken by @witt:2011commentarius [discussed in @witt:2015texts], who frames his work as 'editiones electronicas': alongside full transcriptions of his manuscripts, he produces an eclectic reader's edition, conceptually on the same level as the manuscripts. For many texts – as for some medieval works where manuscripts are available in whose production the author was directly involved – even this step may not be necessary, especially if one is also producing a translation.

By doing this, editors would only be holding ourselves to the same standard as the scribes whose work we rely upon:

> A dire vrai, je réserverais plutôt les flammes éternelles aux scribes, orgueilleux ou non, qui ne suivent pas les règles de la copie. Car il y en a. Et j'entends par mauvais copistes, non pas tant les scribes qui écrivent avec négligence que ceux qui reproduisent leur texte sans le respecter, et à plus forte raison, le corrigent. Le plus grand tort, en effet, que l'on puisse faire à un texte est de l'amender en le copiant. Il y eut à toute époque des gens qui se sont crus malins et ne se sont pas fait scrupule de pareilles pratiques. [@dain:1975manuscrits, p. 18]

In an online context, where we are no longer concerned about the limitations of space of the expense of printing, why should editors be free to modify texts and suppress evidence that does not fit within our conjectured stemma, when we curse medieval scholars for doing the same thing?

For those working with many manuscripts, the production of precise transcriptions is frequently seen as too laborious; but over the long term, it allows for a division of labour impossible with traditional methods of collation. The perfectionism that printing promotes  paradoxically prevents the reading of Latin. We scold ourselves for publishing so little in comparison to our predecessors, but often forget that this is not an equal comparison: a text from the nineteenth-century Patrologia Latina might not simply be a reprint of a seventeenth-century edition, as it declares: a little further research can reveal this in turn to be a resetting of an edition from the fifteenth century, which itself may have only printed a single manuscript. If our aim is simply to be able to read the text to find out what it says on a basic level – an unfulfilled need for many medieval works – a documentary edition of a single well-chosen manuscript made to modern standards would be far more accurate than what we use in practice.

# In defence of TEI: Editing Samuel Presbiter

If, then, we are to create documentary editions, how are we to do it? One can only transcribe one document at a time, and while editors have commonly collated every manuscript against an earlier text [cf. @west:1973textual, p. 66], it is difficult to keep track of this when there is no earlier edition; and, while relatively quick, the method easily results in error. The transcription module of the Text Encoding Initiative promotes a model of one computer file used to represent a single physical document, offering various structures to show the variation that can occur within these artefacts.

It is periodically intimated that TEI itself is to blame for the failure of digital editions to attain any kind of critical mass. @schmidt:2014towards posits another model for how we might structure a networked edition (what he has called a 'multi-version document'), taking the idea to its absolute extreme. He rejects the TEI model centred on the physical object, and instead suggests that every layer of correction and scribal addition, as well as new editorial emendations, should be a separate text file, treating it like a collection of files in a version control system. This is clever in many ways, and if we could ask a computer to read every manuscript for us and trust its output, it might make sense. For humans, it is difficult to keep many files synchronized, and even an edition based on a single manuscript could easily be required to consist of six different files. It is especially unfortunate that he disregards the interpretative aspect of TEI, since forcing one to express what one means through common terminology rather than through typographical appearance can prevent confusion. If we are concerned that every minor digital edition practically has to reinvent the wheel, blame should not be placed primarily on TEI itself: the reality is that we have yet to form clear expectations of what needs to be included in online editions. Most seriously, there are almost no publishers supporting the use of any software but Microsoft Word (perhaps LaTeX or Classical Text Editor, if one is lucky). Inventing a new markup standard will not fix these problems. In my experience from editing in print and online formats, the use of TEI solves a number of practical issues and can even save time.

Samuel Presbiter would have been entirely lost to history except for the chance survival of two manuscripts from the Benedictine abbey of Bury St Edmunds (Oxford, Bodleian Library, MS Bodley 860 and Cambridge, Pembroke College, MS 115), both bearing his name. These tell us that he was a student of William de Montibus, who taught at cathedral school in Lincoln from the 1180s until some point before his death in 1213 [see @goering:1992william]. Bodley 860, fols. 94r–107v contains a work with the heading 'Hec sunt collecta ex diuersis auditis in scola magistri Willelmi de Monte' ('These are collected from various things heard in the school of master William de Montibus'), a charming collection of poems designed to help remember various theological lessons, explained in more detail in the included commentaries. It contains all sorts of details about the world view of people in the Middle Ages that one often takes for granted, in conveniently excerptible passages; this, combined with grammatical consistency, makes it a perfect text for students, and I began an edition in late 2011 [forthcoming, @dunning:2015samuel].

The problem with *Ex diuersis auditis* is that its layout simply does not fit with a key modern assumption of how a book should work: one cannot start reading at the top of the page and scan to the bottom. Instead, the text begins with the commentary, which is pared with the applicable line of verse below it, often with wavy lines drawn to link the various sections. The commentary is far longer than the verses, meaning that each poem can stretch over several pages in a direct transcription from the manuscript. The editorial board (for which I have only praise, as they improved the final product considerably) found that printing this book, especially for student purposes, would require some kind of adaptation to reduce confusion. It was eventually determined to move the verses to the top of each section, and key the commentary to these by line number. Reaching this stage meant iterating through nearly a dozen possible layouts.

This process made it apparent just how dependent editors are on modern typography as a markup scheme to communicate their understanding of the text's meaning. Early versions of my text followed the layout of the manuscript, which does not use modern cues such as indentation that we use to distinguish between hexameter and pentameter lines. Lacking these features, it was difficult to follow the text in places, and we ended up in long discussions over typography, when the real concern was over semantics. Likewise, it is a convention in modern editing to set off verse lines quoted in prose as a block quotation. In most cases, this is only done to show that the editor is aware that the line is verse; but it can often disrupt the flow of the text, since it was not intended by the medieval author. Imposing type on medieval books, in fact, often means that the text loses the flexibility that it had in manuscript copies; modern standards often make them appear both more precise and less innovative than they truly were. While the rearranged text of *Ex diuersis auditis* is much easier to read, one loses the ability to cite the manuscript by folio, as well as the possibility of making historical inferences about how readers might have used the text, and the possibility of experiencing non-linear habits of reading.

This problem has come up again in creating a digital edition of Samuel's *De oratione dominica* (*On the Lord's Prayer*). With TEI, one can simply use the `<l>` element to designate the verse lines and metre as such, and link these to one another and the sections of commentary, leaving much less ambiguity and allowing the typesetter to work much more efficiently. It is true that there is an initial learning curve inherent to XML, but I for one have wasted far more time on typography than TEI. The technology is simply a better fit: the copying of texts in the medieval period has far more in common with the unpredictable nature of Web design than with the immutable printed book.

*De oratione dominica* also exemplifies another reason for a broader focus on methods of visualizing textual reuse and variation, rather than merely comparing largely identical texts for collation. As with *Ex diuersis auditis*, there is only one manuscript of this work, leaving no possibility but a documentary edition. The work turns out, however, to be a versification of Hugh of St Victor's *De quinque septenis* (*On the Five Sevens*), and some basis for comparing the two texts is necessary. All that is needed in this case is a public-domain text with a clear historical grounding, representative of something Samuel could have read. The most recent edition of the work turns out to be highly inaccurate [@baron:1969quinque uses a single manuscript as a base text, but misreports variants and arbitrarily classicizes spellings], and it is not clear whether its text could be republished, due to the ambiguous copyright status of edited texts under American law. Creating a critical edition would be unnecessary and time-consuming, but producing a new documentary edition of a major manuscript (conveniently available online) was about a day's work, and a future editor will simply be able to check this, with a much better chance of detecting any errors, rather than having to re-collate that text from nothing.

# The whole book: Editing Alexander Neckam

Alexander Neckam (1157–1217) is more representative of the typical Anglo-Latin author: nineteenth-century scholars edited a few of his works, rather unsympathetically; a few more have appeared since in obscure publications; far are only in manuscript. He has gone largely unstudied primarily because of the scholarly accident that R.W. Hunt, the future Keeper of Manuscripts at the Bodleian Library, wrote a significant DPhil thesis on him in 1936, whose perfectionism meant that the book was only published posthumously – in a form only slightly updated from what he had written half a century earlier [@hunt:1984schools]. Alexander is best known for writing the first description of the magnetic compass [@smith:1992precursors, pp. 12–18]. In the Middle Ages, however, he was best known for a series of biblical commentaries, which he used as excuses for discussing many different topics of science, theology, philosophy, and literature. These are mostly unstudied, leaving a significant gap in our historical understanding of this author and his milieu.

Determining the authenticity of Alexander's works is largely dependent on *Sol meldunensis*, a miscellany made between 1246 and 1260 by his nephew, Geoffrey Brito (now Cambridge, University Library, MS Gg.6.42). The scribe is careful and had accurate sources available, working from Alexander's own abbey at Cirencester. Critical editions tend to report its variants without comment. But the miscellany is itself a standalone work: the compiler melds together excerpts from Alexander's books as new 'sermons', adding phrases and modifying the text as he goes. Many of the variants found in this book were purposely introduced, but it is almost impossible to judge what these are without the full context. This is a typical example of how a printed book with a critical apparatus fails scholars: it simply cannot contain the information necessary for the reader to check the work of the editor. Alexander's works, then, cannot be properly edited without understanding this manuscript; but neither can *Sol meldunensis* be published with a full apparatus without editions of Alexander's works. What is needed is a method of provisionally publishing a documentary edition of each manuscript, gradually linking these with new editions and updating them as the contents of the manuscripts are revealed.

In assembling a collection of Alexander's works ([TEI files are available](https://github.com/adunning/alexander-neckam) pending the emergence of an online publisher, and the texts are searchable through [Corpus Corporum](http://www.mlat.uzh.ch/MLS/)), many more examples have emerged demonstrating the value of editing a manuscript on its own terms. An earlier edition of *Tractatus super Mulierem fortem* (*Tractate on the Strong Woman*), which covered the first book of the work only [@mahoney:1971critical], argues that there is no relationship between the two main manuscripts (Oxford, Jesus College, MS 94 and Oxford, Bodleian Library, MS Bodley 528: given the sigla J and B). This may appear to be the case if one only collates the texts in their corrected form against one another. Carefully working through the scribal emendations made to J reveals that B (or its ancestor) was likely copied directly from J, but before it was corrected. Comparison with other manuscripts suggests that the corrector of J was probably Alexander himself.

In approaching scribes with more charity, and assuming that they essentially knew what they were doing, many more details emerge that contribute to a much richer text. An edition of Alexander's meditation on Mary Magdalene [@bestul:1999meditation] acknowledges the presence of certain marginal rubrics, but omits them: studying these reveals that they are of a similar character to headings found elsewhere in Alexander's writings, sometimes in his own hand, suggesting that they are integral to the text. Further, paraph marks are provided in the manuscript, and reading the text with these reveals a sensible organization that highlights its relationship to the *Tractatus super Mulierem fortem*: but the edition imposes its own paragraph structure without informing the reader of this. Similarly, the sole manuscript of the *Corrogationes Noui Promethei* includes highly sensible paragraph divisions, but the edition ignores these, again without even notifying the reader of their presence [@cropp:1991critical]. These are more obvious details: many minor details have also gone wrong in editions of medieval Latin. It was once common practice to classicize all Latin texts regardless of their period, and some of these spellings remain entrenched. It is widely assumed, for instance, that *Cristus*, on the rare occasions when it is written in an unabbreviated form, is an error for *Christus*; but by keeping track of abbreviations, it is possible to show that this was precisely how most scribes in southern England at the turn of the thirteenth century would have rendered it. By recording the original punctuation, capitalization, and spelling of a manuscript, one can learn a great deal about the scribe's approach, and even save oneself time.

Creating a transcription of a manuscript on its own terms forces one to account for the scribe's understanding of the work, helping to avoid common syntactical errors. Most editors of medieval Latin texts learn textual criticism through classical works, where the punctuation is never original and often misleading; because of this, many editors (including myself, in my first run at *Ex diuersis auditis*) ignore the punctuation in a manuscript, and insert modern marks as they work. Inevitably, however, the manuscript influences one's transcription, which often results in a period or a comma appearing wherever any kind of punctuation appears in the witness. This is often precisely wrong. Medieval Latin texts were written with a predecessor to our system of punctuation, but with significant differences. There are many variations on its application, meaning that it is often necessary to read a section of the text in the original form to understand how scribes use their marks, the utility of which @parkes:1992pause sought to convince scholars. In thirteenth-century manuscripts, the proper transposition of a *punctus elevatus* into our modern system is usually not a comma, but *nothing at all*. Having realized this simple fact, I was able to find many places where I had oversimplified or even mangled a sentence. It is surprisingly common to find errors in published editions from this period that can be traced to an inappropriate and usually undocumented imitation of the original punctuation. Given that, in medieval Latin manuscripts, it sometimes represents the writer's own wishes – in both the Alexander Neckam and Samuel Presbiter books, a hand that emends the punctuation extensively probably belongs to the author – it is only sensible to pay close attention to its function, and in some cases even to present it within the edition rather than impose a modern system. Readers of medieval Latin are already accustomed to reading differing English, French, German, and Italian customs of punctuation, along with the *per cola et commata* method found in editions of the Vulgate, and there is no reason to think that they could not also deal with the original, especially if a vernacular translation is supplied in parallel with the edition. Moreover, in a digital publication, it is possible to provide both a diplomatic transcription of the original and a format designed for students.

# Grading documentary editions

As one can see from the cases of Samuel Presbiter and Alexander Neckam, one of the problems in setting out to create a TEI edition of a manuscript is the lack of guidelines indicating what needs to be included in the encoding. Once one realizes that it is not useful to record every detail from a manuscript, the only logical conclusion is to align one's markup with the research questions at hand. Unfortunately, without a corpus of digital texts for study to which one can add one's work, and without any clear indication of how TEI elements can be analysed, it often happens that one only realizes during the process of editing that it would have been useful to have recorded a certain feature.

This situation could be improved with recommendations for what should be included in a documentary edition of a medieval manuscript, both for guiding new editors and indicating to other researchers how editions can be used. I propose these levels [for another approach, see @pierazzo:2011rationale]:

1. Basic transcription necessary to read and search the text of the manuscript, and find significant variants in a collation with other witnesses. Markup may be light, potentially the result of an OCRed text from an old edition (perhaps, one day, the result of applying OCR software directly to the manuscript). Spelling may be normalized.
2. Information required to cite the text with precision and study minor variants between witnesses, including changes in spelling and punctuation. Any modifications to the manuscript should be indicated using the appropriate tags (e.g. `<add>`, `<corr>`). The edition should encode the position of line breaks (if only to facilitate verifying one's work against the manuscript), and follow original spelling as far as abbreviations allow, though it may be necessary to silently regularize word division to some extent. Punctuation and capitalization should be regularized only if necessary; appropriate tags should be used for indicating quotation (e.g. `<quote>`, `<said>`, `<mentioned>`) rather than inserting quotation marks. As a matter of practicality, if one wishes to capitalize proper names in a reader's version (until late in the Middle Ages, it was common to use capitals only for first letter of a sentence), it is easiest to accomplish this by marking the words with `<name>`, `<title>`, etc., which also allows the terms to be compiled in an index. Abbreviations may be silently expanded, though it may be helpful to record them in cases of ambiguity.
3. Information necessary to study the exact contemporary reading of the text and precise spelling, together with the scribe's linguistic profile [see @parkes:1994latin]: all of the above, mandating the preservation of the original punctuation, encoding editorial regularizations of hyphenation and word division, and documenting all expansions of abbreviations.
4. Information needed for statistical analysis of a scribe's graphic profile [e.g. @gobbitt:2012orthographic]: the above in addition to full encoding of abbreviation markers and unusual letterforms relevant for palaeographical study (e.g. round and long 's').

Work imported from elsewhere would mostly fall into the first category, but these texts would still be of far more use than nothing at all. Most new editions would probably fall into the second category: this is the point at which the most broadly useful features of the manuscript are recorded before the XML file starts to become too unwieldy to edit by hand. The third and fourth categories are much more specialized, but represent real and useful research questions, and with better software these levels would become more easily achievable. It is much easier to upgrade a transcription from one level to another than to start afresh, and over time, scholars could build up one another's work through all these stages based on the problems they need to solve.

One could think of this approach in terms of restoring a building, or a work of art: when one edits a manuscript in a digital format, it is possible to carefully erect new walls without destroying the what is there, and years later it will still be possible for someone else to redecorate without cursing us for destroying the original fixtures. Rearranging a text for print is usually more akin to gutting a room and rebuilding it entirely to fit modern trends. At the same time, because one is creating a technology-independent edition that can have more than one possible layout rather than one tied precisely to the needs of paper, it is not necessary to sacrifice usability.

# Towards networked editions

Though digital Latin texts have been available for decades, these editions are rarely viewed as reliable, as their relationship to manuscript sources is often opaque. The simplest method of solving this that still takes advantage of earlier digitization projects, and with the broadest utility to researchers, is to gradually build up online editions as collections of documentary sources, with the eventual aim of enabling the examination of relationships between these texts in a broad historical context.

Documentary editions have long been produced for works whose text can be traced to a single manuscript. With digital publication comes the possibility of responsibly expanding their use to other fundamentally inaccessible works that are presently available only in manuscript form. Providing a method to legitimately publish a documentary edition of a source would fill the need for texts that can be corrected as well as read. Transcriptions already exist of many unedited works, but these are rarely made public, and often lost at the scholar's death. In the meantime, the book continues to go unread, and the handful of people who care enough to work on the manuscript duplicate one another's work many times over. Documentary editions were usually impractical for the purposes of print, but can be produced in an online environment without sacrificing readability or accuracy.

Producing a new critical edition of a popular work requires the comparison of hundreds of manuscripts, with the unintended result that there are many popular texts that have not been edited since the early modern period. If our aim is simply to be able to read a text to find out what it says on a basic level, a documentary edition of a single well-chosen manuscript made to modern standards would be far more accurate than what we read in practice. Editors might gradually build up a set of transcriptions developed by others and see precisely, for example, where their predecessors misread a Merovingian script. In learning palaeography, a student might adapt a transcription of a text to an unexamined witness and add it to a collection to see how it compares to other available texts, while contributing something to the wider picture. Most importantly, presenting critical editions as a collection of documentary editions rather than idealized texts with a commentary on selected variants allows the examination of details such as paragraphing, punctuation, capitalization, and spelling, enabling one to understand with much more precision how someone might have read a text in a certain period, even if the editor found it to be stemmatically irrelevant to the critical text. In this way, digital publication offers the possibility of a more fertile, solid, and accessible basis for reading ancient literature.

# Bibliography

